---
layout: statements
title: "Creative Commons' letter"
source: "Creative Commons"
link: http://creativecommons.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/Call-for-release-of-Bassel-to-President-signed.pdf
categories: [ statements ]
---

**444 Castro Street, Suite 900
Mountain View, CA 94041
Tel: 650-294-4732
Fax: 650-965-1605
http://creativecommons.org**

**October 29, 2012**

**Minister of Defense
His Excellency ‘Imad al-Fraij
Ministry of Defense, Omayyad Square
Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic
Fax: +963 11 223 7842 +963 11 666 2460**

**Re: Call for the release of Bassel Khartabil**

**Your Excellency:**

**Creative Commons expresses alarm at the detainment of Bassel Khartabil, a respected
computer engineer specializing in open source software development. We understand that
Mr. Khartabil has been detained by the Syrian government without communication since 15
March, 2012. Creative Commons urges Syrian authorities to grant Bassel immediate access
to his family, a lawyer of his choice, and all necessary medical treatment.**

**Creative Commons calls on Syrian authorities to release Bassel Khartabil, unless he is
promptly charged with an internationally recognizable criminal offense and tried in
proceedings that respect international fair trial standards. Further, Creative Commons calls
on Syrian authorities to ensure that Bassel Khartabil is protected from torture and other ill
treatment.**

**Mr. Khartabil is a valuable contributor to, and leader in, the technology community. Across
all aspects of his work, his expertise and focus has been in support of the development of
publicly available, free, open source computer software code and technical tools. He pursues
this not only through his valuable volunteer efforts in support of Creative Commons, but in
all of his work in the technology arena. Through his efforts, the quality and availability of
freely and openly available technology is improved and advanced.**

**Sincerely,**

**Catherine M. Casserly, Ph.D.
CEO, Creative Commons**

**444 Castro Street, Suite 900
Mountain View, CA 94041
Tel: 650-294-4732
Fax: 650-965-1605
http://creativecommons.org**

**cc: President Bashar al-Assad
Presidential Palace, al-Rashid Street
Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic
Fax: +963 11 332 3410**

**Minister of Foreign Affairs
Walid al-Mu’allim
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
al-Rashid Street
Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic
Fax: +963 11 214 6253**

**U.S. Interests Section of the Embassy of the Czech Republic
Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic
Email: USIS_damascus@embassy.mzv.cz**

**Embassy of Syria in Washington D.C., USA
2215 Wyoming Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20008
United States of America
Fax: +1-202-265-4585
Email: info@syrembassy.net**

**Syria Consulate , United States
3 San Joaquin Plaza, #190
Newport Beach, CA 92660
United States of America
Fax: +1-949-640-9292**
