---
layout: events
title: "#BASSELPICNICDAY 2016: GO OUTSIDE AND HAVE A #BasselPicnicDay"
categories: [ events, basselpicnicday ]
tags: [ headline ]
---

GLOBAL - Saturday, 13 August 2016 - Friends and supporters of Bassel are invited to get together and have picnics in their cities in Bassel’s honor on the first ever #BasselPicnicDay.

\#BasselPicnicDay is a day to share food, drink, and conversation with people who care about Bassel, on blankets in the grass, in the sun. Let’s strengthen the ties of our network by coming together for a global picnic, and talk about who Bassel is, who we are, and why we need Bassel free.

One love, one picnic:  #BasselPicnicDay.

## GET INVOLVED

* Join a picnic
  * Check this list below to see if a picnic is already being planned in your city.
  * Go to the picnic. Bring some thoughts about Bassel

* Plan a picnic
  * Choose a park and a time in your city to hold a picnic on Saturday 13 August.
  * Invite your friends, family, or colleagues to the picnic.
  * Announce details about your picnic on social media with the #BasselPicnicDay hashtag.
  * We’ll pick up your details and add them to the list below.
  * Gather food, drink, and a blanket for your picnic.
  * Have your picnic!
  * Get to know whoever joins your picnic, connecting however you do through Bassel.
  * Read some of Cost of Freedom or Waiting together. Listen to some music from the Disquiet Junto inspired by Bassel.
  * Share some document of your picnic with the #BasselPicnicDay hashtag.

## PLANNED PICNICS - 13 August 2016

San Francisco: Dolores Park, from 14:00 - 18:00, somewhere near a tree. Look for the life-sized Bassel cut out

London: Fulham Palace, from 13:00 - 17:00

Paris: Champs de Mars, 16:00

Croatia: TBA
