---
layout: press
title: "Wikipedia founder: Information can beat oppression"
source: "CNN"
link: http://edition.cnn.com/2016/01/20/opinions/wales-wikipedia-information-beats-oppression/
language: en
categories: [ press ]
---

> Born and raised in Damascus, Khartabil began tinkering with open technologies early. The lead for Creative Commons Syria, he has also made great contributions to Arabic Wikipedia and Firefox, Mozilla's open Web browser. He distinguished himself on the global stage as a passionate advocate for free knowledge in the Arab world, pushing for greater inclusion, translation and exchange of ideas.
>
> In May, ISIS took control of the ancient city of Palmyra in Syria. The terrorist group is known for slaughtering and displacing innocent civilians in the cities it controls. Beyond the massive human toll it exacts, ISIS also makes it standard practice to destroy the sites and monuments that represent cultural history and identity.
>
> Palmyra, for example, has been described as "one of the most renowned archaeological sites in the world." It was recognized as a World Heritage Site in 1980, and artifacts found at this desert oasis date as far back as the Neolithic period, about 9,500 years ago. Sadly, today, much of this has been destroyed -- including the Arch of Triumph, constructed by the Romans in the second century.
>
> But thanks to Khartabil, this shared heritage is not completely lost.
>
> In 2008, he began a project, New Palmyra, to document the magnificent city digitally. The project joined existing satellite photos and other resources into a single "world" file, rendering the spectacular monuments and ruins in 3-D. His goal at the time was simply to share a cultural treasure with the millions of people who might never visit Syria. He could not have known that today his efforts would digitally revive a city in ruins.
>
> He also could not have known how this work would make him a target of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's forces.

